# WebAssembly Text
## What is WebAssembly Text (WAT)?

If you pass a compiled WebAssembly[^1] module (a `.wasm` file) through a decompiler, you will get the text representation of the [op codes](https://pengowray.github.io/wasm-ops/) used by that program.

This text representation is known as WebAssembly Text (or WAT), and it is now possible to write programs directly in this text representation.

## But WebAssembly is Just a Compilation Target, So Why Bother?

WebAssembly certainly is a compilation target, and it is certainly true that the majority of WebAssembly programs will be generated by compilers, not humans.  However, these facts should not be used to conclude that there are therefore no cases in which it would be beneficial to write a WebAssembly Text program by hand.

Although it is a very low-level development process, writing WebAssembly Text programs by hand brings the benefits of being able to build a very small, very efficient program suitable for performing highly repetitive, CPU-intensive tasks.

This introduction to WebAssembly Text serves as the starting point for subsequent posts that will describe how to implement the CPU-intensive calculations needed to plot the Mandelbrot and Julia Sets.

## Table of Contents

- [Prerequisites](00%20Prerequisites.md)
- [Benefits of WebAssembly](01%20Benefits%20of%20WebAssembly)
- [WebAssembly Module](02%20WebAssembly%20Module)
- [Calling WebAssembly from a Host Environment](03%20Calling%20WebAssembly%20from%20a%20Host%20Environment)
- [WAT Datatypes](04%20WAT%20Datatypes)
- [Local Variables](05%20Local%20Variables)
- [Arrangement of WAT Instructions](06%20Arrangement%20of%20WAT%20Instructions)
- [Conditions](07%20Conditions)
- [Loops](08%20Loops)
- [More About Functions](09%20More%20About%20Functions)
- [WASM and Shared Memory](10%20WASM%20and%20Shared%20Memory)










[^1]: Please note: there is no space between the words "Web" and "Assembly"


