---
layout: post
title:  "Introduction to WebAssembly Text"
date:   2021-11-24 12:00:00 +0000
redirect_from: /chriswhealy/Introduction%20to%20WebAssembly%20Text/
category: chriswhealy
author: Chris Whealy
excerpt: An introduction to programming directly in WebAssembly Text
---

## What is WebAssembly Text (WAT)?

Any time you write a program in a high level language such as C, Python or Rust, then instruct the compiler to generate a WebAssembly[^1] file, the result will be a `.wasm` file containing the binary [op codes](https://webassembly.github.io/spec/core/binary/instructions.html) for your program.  Since this is an executable file, it is intended only to be machine-readable, not human-readable.  Most of the time, this is not a problem; however, as part of your development process, you may need to look inside this machine-readable file: and at this point you need a set of tools that can translate the WebAssembly op codes back into some sort of human-readable format.

### Working With WebAssembly Files

When you need to directly manipulate a `.wasm` file in some way, the [WebAssembly Binary Toolkit](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wabt) (WABT) becomes a vital resource in your development tool bag.  WABT provides you with a variety of tools for working directly with WebAssembly files, in both their binary and human-readable forms.

Using the WABT disassembler called `wasm2wat`, you can transform a compiled WebAssembly module (a `.wasm` file) back into a file containing the plain text op codes used by that program (a `.wat` file).  This plain text representation is known as WebAssembly Text (or WAT).

In addition to disassembling `.wasm` files to plain text `.wat` files, WABT also provides you with a tool called `wat2wasm` that does the reverse.  It takes a plain text WebAssembly Text file and assembles into an executable `.wasm` file.

The object of this tutorial is to give an introduction to writing programs directly in WebAssembly Text format.

## But WebAssembly is Just a Compilation Target, So Why Bother?

WebAssembly certainly is a compilation target, and it is certainly true that the majority of WebAssembly programs will be generated by compilers, not humans.  However, it is a weak line of reasoning to take this fact, and from it, conclude that there are therefore no cases in which it would be beneficial to write a WebAssembly Text program by hand.

Although this development process requires you to write the very low-level WebAssembly Text instructions by hand, it brings with it the benefits of being able to build an extremely small, highly efficient program ideally suited for performing CPU-bound tasks.

This introduction to WebAssembly Text serves as the starting point for a subsequent tutorial that describes how to [plot the Mandelbrot and Julia Sets](./plotting-fractals-in-webassembly).

## Table of Contents

- [Prerequisites](/chriswhealy/Introduction%20to%20WebAssembly%20Text/00/)
- [Benefits of WebAssembly](/chriswhealy/Introduction%20to%20WebAssembly%20Text/01/)
- [Creating a WebAssembly Module](/chriswhealy/Introduction%20to%20WebAssembly%20Text/02/)
- [Calling WebAssembly from a Host Environment](/chriswhealy/Introduction%20to%20WebAssembly%20Text/03/)
- [WAT Datatypes](/chriswhealy/Introduction%20to%20WebAssembly%20Text/04/)
- [Local Variables](/chriswhealy/Introduction%20to%20WebAssembly%20Text/05/)
- [Arrangement of WAT Instructions](/chriswhealy/Introduction%20to%20WebAssembly%20Text/06/)
- [Conditions](/chriswhealy/Introduction%20to%20WebAssembly%20Text/07/)
- [Loops](/chriswhealy/Introduction%20to%20WebAssembly%20Text/08/)
- [More About Functions](/chriswhealy/Introduction%20to%20WebAssembly%20Text/09/)
- [WASM and Shared Memory](/chriswhealy/Introduction%20to%20WebAssembly%20Text/10/)




---
[^1]: Please note: there is no space between the words "Web" and "Assembly"
